Mongoose 3.9.7 has just been released. While I did say that 3.9.6 would be the
last release before 4.0.0-rc0, the MongoDB core server introduced a [minor
backwards-breaking change in 2.8.0-rc3](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/SERVER-16518).
This threw a wrench into my plans to make Mongoose use [v2.0 of the MongoDB
NodeJS driver](https://github.com/mongodb/node-mongodb-native/tree/2.0), which
needs to account for the MongoDB server's change. In order to avoid having to
introduce potentially backwards-breaking changes in a release candidate,
Mongoose is postponing 4.0.0-rc0 until early 2015. Outside of upgrading to the
new version of the driver, 3.9.7 is feature-complete, and packed with some
very powerful new features.

## A Brief Aside on Versioning in Mongoose

As an aside, starting in 4.0.0, Mongoose will move to using
[semantic versioning (semver)](http://semver.org/) rather than its current
stable/unstable versioning system. Mongoose originally used
[Linux-style
stable/unstable versioning](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_versioning#Odd-numbered_versions_for_development_releases)
to ensure stability and minimize the likelihood of major bugs. However,
going forward, I think semver is a better standard to ensure that mongoose
remains stable while delivering new features. The trouble with even/odd
versioning is that the unstable branch is effectively developed in a vacuum,
as developers are discouraged from using it. Thus, when the new version is
released, there are hundreds of commits in the new release that have not stood
up to production-level scrutiny (mongoose 4.0.0 is currently 420 commits ahead
of 3.8, and 3.8 was in turn 813 commits ahead of 3.6). Smaller, more focused
releases will enable mongoose to release more features faster and minimize the
amount of code change between stable releases, which in turn will lead to a
more stable project.

## On to the New Features

Versioning rant aside, I'm going to be writing a series of posts explaining
new features in Mongoose 4. In this post, I'll highlight the results of our
[refactoring of Mongoose's validator system](https://github.com/LearnBoost/mongoose/issues/2282). The goal of this refactoring was to enable
validators to produce [richly customizable error messages](https://github.com/LearnBoost/mongoose/issues/2132), for instance, enabling you to associate
an HTTP status code with a validation error. How does this work in practice?
Suppose you define a schema with a custom validator:

```javascript
var breakfastSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  description: {
    type: String,
    validate: [{
      validator: function(v) {
        return v.length <= 70;
      },
      msg: 'Error code: {ERRORCODE} for value "{VALUE}"',
      errorCode: 25
    }]
  }
});
```

Now, suppose you have a document with the above schema, and you set the
description to something longer than 70 characters:

```javascript
doc.description = '';
for (var i = 0; i < 7; ++i) {
  doc.description += '6chars'; // total 72 characters
}

doc.validate(function(error) {
  // error.errors['description'].toString() will equal:
  // 'Error code: 25 for value "6chars..."'
});
```

The validator properties aren't only accessible in the message. They're also
added to the resulting error object:

```javascript
// The http-status module includes a map of HTTP statuses
var status = require('http-status');

var breakfastSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  description: {
    type: String,
    validate: [{
      validator: function(v) {
        return v.length <= 10;
      },
      http: status.FORBIDDEN // HTTP 403
    }]
  }
});

// ...

doc.description = 'this is longer than 10 chars';
doc.validate(function(error) {
  // error.errors['description'].http is equal to
  // status.FORBIDDEN (403)
});
```

This feature is relatively small, but is exceptionally useful in allowing you
to attach custom properties to validation errors. The next post, in early
January, will cover a much larger topic: using Mongoose 4's in-browser schema
validation with AngularJS.